Welcome to Civ II Fantastic Worlds!

----IMPORTANT: Read This----

When you install the scenarios, the files for each are put into separate
directories. They absolutely MUST stay that way. If you move files around,
there's no telling what might happen, and Customer Service might not be able
to fix it.

**** Do not move the scenario files.****

The same goes for any scenario games you save. When you save a scenario game
(even if you do so using the Autosave function), that save file automatically
goes into the directory with that scenario. When the time comes to load the file,
look for it in the scenario directory, not in the normal Civilization II directory.

This brings up one more important rule. If you copy a scenario save file to
use with Civ II on another computer, make sure that you copy the file into
the correct scenario directory.

----Playing----

Once the set-up is complete, the scenarios are ready to play. 
To start:

(1) If you want to see and hear the uninstalled video portions 
    of the game, make sure that the Civ II Fantastic Worlds
    CD-ROM is in the drive. (Remember, if you did not install
    the Recommended files when you originally installed 
    Civilization II, there will be no sound effects regardless
    of whether the CD is in the drive. There will be some music.)

    The Fantastic Worlds CD-ROM does not include the Wonder videos
    or animated Heralds. If you want to see these, put the original
    Civilization II CD in your drive instead of Fantastic Worlds.

(2) If it is not already running, start Windows.

(3) Now simply double-click the Civilization II icon (or click
    Civ2 on the Windows '95 Start menu) to start the game.

----A Quick Review----

Although every Civilization II player has surely read and reread
the manual several times, your mind might have wandered a little
over the brief mentions of scenarios. Just in case, let's go through
a quick rehash of how you load scenarios for play and what it means
to win one.

----Loading a Scenario----

The first menu you see when the game starts up doesn't have a name.

* Click the radio button next to 'Begin Scenario'.
* Click on the OK button.

Now you need to choose the scenario you want to play. The selection
window works exactly like a typical Windows file selection window.

* First, double-click on the directory named 'scenario'.
* Next, double-click on the directory of the scenario you want.
* Finally, double-click on the name of the scenario file itself.

The MicroProse scenarios are each in a separate directory:

Scenario			Directory	File
----------------------------------------------------------
The Age of Reptiles		Dinosaur	dinosaur.scn
Atlantis			Atlantis	atlantis.scn
Ice Planet			Iceplnet	iceplnet.scn
Mars Now!			Mars		mars.scn
Master of Magic, Jr.		Momjr		mom_jr.scn
Master of Orion, Jr.		Moojr		moo_jr.scn
The Mythic History of Midgard	Midgard		midgard.scn
The New World			Newworld	newworld.scn
Samurai				Samurai		samurai.scn
The World of Jules Verne	Verne		verne.scn
X-COM: Assault			X-com		x-com.scn

The Best of the Net scenarios are all in sub-directories of the
directory named BestNet2:

Scenario			Directory	File
-----------------------------------------------------------
Battle of the Sexes		Battle		battle.scn
Bears at Play			Bears		bears.scn
Civ-Life!			Bio		bio.scn
Hidden				Hidden		hidden.scn
Mammoth				Mammoth		mammoth.scn
Paradise			Paradise	paradise.scn
Santa is Coming			Santa		santa.scn
USA 2010			USA2010		usa2010.scn


Once you've chosen a scenario, you see the introductory text, which
explains the situation you're getting yourself into. Click OK when
you've finished reading it. Now, you go through the normal decisions
for the beginning of a Civilization II game.

(1) Choose the civilization you want to lead. Every scenario includes
    empires that are interesting to play - and occasionally some that
    are not. Some tribes are only included to spice things up, and
    weren't designed to be player-controlled. The recommended tribes
    are mentioned in the introduction and the manual.

(2) Select a Difficulty Level. The default is generally Deity, since we
    assume scenario players are already somewhat experienced.

(3) Enter the name under which you rule.

(4) Choose the gender you want other civilizations' emissaries to use
    when referring to your ruler.

After that, the scenario begins in earnest.

----Objectives and Winning----

In some scenarios, scoring and winning are the same as in any normal game.
However, some scenarios use the Objectives system instead. In this case,
success and failure are measured in terms of who has how many objective cities
(and sometimes wonders) under their control at the end of the game.

One civilization in each Objectives scenario is considered the protagonist
nation. It's always the same nation (noted in the introductory text), regardless
of which one you choose to play. The designer of the scenario has marked certain
cities as objectives. (To tell which cities are objectives, select Find City
from the Kingdom menu.) Some cities are Major Objectives; these count for 3 times
as much as normal objectives.

The only object of the scenario is to capture and hold as many objectives as you
can. This and this alone determines the outcome. If some of the Wonders of the
World are also considered objectives, each objective wonder you capture also
counts toward the total.

There are four possible results of any Objective scenario. The number of
objectives required for each is a pre-set characteristic of the scenario. The
protagonist nation can:

   Win a Decisive Victory,
   Win a Marginal Victory,
   Suffer a Marginal Defeat, or
   Suffer a Decisive Defeat.

Whatever the outcome for the protagonist, every other civilization gets the
corresponding, opposite result. Thus, for example, if you're the protagonist
and you win a Marginal Victory, all your opponents get a Marginal Defeat.

----When You're Done----

When you quit or finish a scenario, you return to that unnamed first menu.
You can begin another scenario (or a regular game) if you wish. If you prefer
to leave Civilization II, click Cancel.

----Last Minute Updates----

(1) The advice given to you by the High Council is almost never relevant or
    correct during a scenario game. Ignore it.

(2) The Civilopedia has been updated to reflect the changes for each MicroProse
    scenario. The updated Civilopedias, however, are text only.

(3) There are 8 new unit 'slots' for scenario builders. Each has its own sound file.
    These files are named extra1.wav through extra8.wav. IMPORTANT: All sound files
    for use with Civ II must be .wav format, 8-bit, mono, sampled at 22050 hz.

(4) You can still play all of your old scenarios after installing Fantastic Worlds. 
    The new editors are designed to work with the old files, but if you experience
    problems, try adding the 5 new advance 'slots' and 8 new unit 'slots' in the new
    rules.txt to the old rules.txt in each of your scenario directories.

(5) After you install Fantastic Worlds, you might notice a new file in your Civ II
    directory: 'civ2orig.exe'. This is a backup copy of the original executable. The
    installation program copies an updated executable into this directory, so we save
    the original as a backup. There might also be a 'Civ2scen.exe'; that's the backup
    copy made by Conflicts in Civilization.

(6) Fantastic Worlds includes all of the posted patches for Civ II (and more).

(7) If you want to work with the events macro language, we recommend that you do so
    using the new Events Editor. If you work with the events.txt file directly, there
    will be problems loading versions of that scenario that you saved before you made
    your changes. This might even cause the game to crash. If you have already done so,
    you can fix the affected save file as follows:

    * Go to the DOS prompt
    * Enter the following command:

          DIR\delevent DIR\scenario\SCEN\FILE.sav

      where  DIR is the directory to which you installed Civ II,
             SCEN is the name of the scenario directory, and
             FILE.sav is the name of the save file.

(8) Whenever you alter any file using one of the editors, the original version of
    that file is saved as a backup file. The backup has the same name as the original
    file, except that the extension is '.bak'. 

(9) When you modify icons, the editor creates a .bmp file in your scenario directory;
    the original Civ II files are never changed. The scenario always looks for the .bmp
    file first, then if there is none, it reverts to the original .gif file.

(10) You cannot use the editors to change Civ II--only to create scenarios. You don't
     want to mess up the original game.

(11) A new feature that didn't make it into the manual is the ability to randomly pick
     one of several scenario files stored in the same scenario directory. This is used
     in both the Samurai and Jules Verne scenarios to provide some challenging uncertainty
     at the beginning of the sceanrio. You can use this feature in your scenarios, too,
     if you follow these simple rules:

     1. Build several similar scenarios and save each as an .scn file--all in the same
        scenario directory. We recommend you name each with the same title, but different
        numbers. (One file should have no number.) For example, in Jules Verne, we built
        6 scenarios and named them Verne.scn, Verne1.scn, Verne2.scn, Verne3.scn,
        Verne4.scn, and Verne5.scn. (Note that we did not use more than 8 characters in
        any file name.)

     2. Change the extensions of the numbered .scn files to .alt. Using Verne as an example
        again, we changed our six files to Verne.scn, Verne1.alt, Verne2.alt, Verne3.alt,
        Verne4.alt, and Verne5.alt. 

     That's it. Whenever a player selects to play the scenario (the .scn file), Civ II
     randomly picks one of the alternatives to play.

     Note: All the scenarios use the same setup files (rules.txt, events.txt, etc.), but
     if you plan to include an introductory message, you must make an individual one for
     each of the alternate files. The message file has the name as the scenario file, but
     a .txt extension. (Thus, Verne has six intoductions, labelled Verne.txt, Verne1.txt,
     Verne2.txt, Verne3.txt, Verne4.txt, and Verne5.txt.)

(12) Two units.gif files are included for the Jules Verne scenario. Units.gif provides
     pictures of the adventure destinations (an extinct volcano for the journey to the
     center of the earth, an Egyptian city for the lost city of Bala, etc.). Units2.gif
     has no pictures, but only the bare terrain. To make the game more challenging,
     you might not want to know the locations of the adventures. In this case, you can
     rename units.gif to something else and rename units2.gif to units,gif. This makes
     the adventure locations completely invisible.

(13) In several scenarios, each tribe is able to build only a small portion of the 
     units available. Unfortunately, we were unable to modify the Civilopedia to note
     these restrictions. Consequently, don't be surprised if your tribe doesn't get every 
     (or any) unit offered by a tech advance; they just aren't yours to build. This
     generally doesn't cause confusion, except in the Midgard scenario. To cover that base,
     here's a list of unit ownership for every civilization in Midgard. Any units not
     mentioned are either available to everyone or available to no one.

    MIDGARD UNIT OWNERSHIP
    
    Buteos
    1. Hawkmen
    2. Eaglemen
    3. Great Eagles
    4. Enchanted Gian
    5. Frost Giant
    6. Old Man

    Elves
    1. Elf Warriors
    2. Elf Archers
    3. Elf Riders
    4. Treefolk
    5. Changeling
    6. Tree Guards

    Merfolk
    1. Mermen
    2. Merguards
    3. Giant Otterine
    4. Triton Legion
    5. Porpoise Pod
    6. Kraken
    7. Sorcerer

    Goblins
    1. Goblins
    2. Trolls
    3. Crag Wolves
    4. Enchanted Ogre
    5. Giant Spider
    6. Sorcerer
    
    Stygians
    1. Night Riders
    2. Great Bats
    3. Witches
    4. Fell Wraith
    5. Skeletons
    6. Barrow Wights
    7. Lich

    Infidels
    1. Infidels
    2. Berserkers
    3. I. Horsemen
    4. Golden Horde
    5. Baba Yaga
    6. Sorcerer

    Humans
    1. Human Warriors
    2. Housecarls
    3. Rangers
    4. Great Wizard
    5. Enchanted Paladins

    Available To All
    1. Settlers
    2. Dwarves
    3. Ice Drake
    4. Bombard
    5. Ellida
    6. Skidbladner
    7. Dragon Boat
    8. Shield Boat
    9. Lightning Bolt
   10. Fireball
   11. Envoy
   12. Spy
   13. Caravan
   14. Jack O'Lantern
   15. Necromancers
 
(14) You might have noticed that there are limits on where the shield placement cursor
     (in the unit icon editor) will allow you to put the unit shield. That's because we
     prevent you from accidentally using an illegal shield location. Remember that you
     are placing the UPPER LEFT corner of the shield, and the shield cannot overlap the
     lower limits of the diamond or any edge of the unit area.

--END--
